[KEP-4815] Update KEP for 1.35 (#5515)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/4815-dra-partitionable-devices/README.md

      the selector, while setting the `AllNodes` field to `true` means the
      device is available on all nodes in the cluster.

The `SharedCounters` field is mutually exlusive with the `Devices` field, meaning
that `SharedCounters` must always be specified in a different `ResourceSlice` than
devices consuming the counters. They must however be in the same `ResourcePool`.

The `NodeName`, `NodeSelector`, `AllNodes`, and `PerDeviceNodeSelection` fields
can only be set for `ResourceSlice`s that specifies devices. So they must always

> be unset for `ResourceSlices` that specified shared counters.

Author: I've updated the KEP to keep the node selector fields as required.

      the selector, while setting the `AllNodes` field to `true` means the
      device is available on all nodes in the cluster.

The `SharedCounters` field is mutually exlusive with the `Devices` field, meaning
that `SharedCounters` must always be specified in a different `ResourceSlice` than
devices consuming the counters. They must however be in the same resource pool with

> the same `Generation`.

Author: Rewrote this section to clarify this.

scheduled, since pods will be subject to any other constraints (like sufficient
CPU and memory) during scheduling.

These challenges are being addressed as part of the gang scheduling effort that
also includes alignment with DRA.

#### Validation moved from admission to runtime

By allowing cross-`ResourceSlice` references, we will not be able to validate
that the references can actually be resolved during admission since we are only
able to validate a `ResourceSlice` in isolation. This means that users will not
discover mistakes until a `ResourceClaim` actually tries to allocate a device

> that belongs to the `ResourcePool`. This means more complexity and a less user-friendly

Reviewer: Two things:

1) ResourceSlice is not a human-created resource in the typical case. So, errors here would be bugs in the driver.

2) We can have a controller that surfaces inconsistent pools / errors in a ResourceSlice's status, rather than waiting until scheduling time.

scheduled, since pods will be subject to any other constraints (like sufficient
CPU and memory) during scheduling.

These challenges are being addressed as part of the gang scheduling effort that
also includes alignment with DRA.

#### Validation moved from admission to runtime

By allowing cross-`ResourceSlice` references, we will not be able to validate
that the references can actually be resolved during admission since we are only
able to validate a `ResourceSlice` in isolation. This means that users will not
discover mistakes until a `ResourceClaim` actually tries to allocate a device
that belongs to the resource pool.

An invalid resource pool will not prevent a pod from getting scheduled if devices
can be allocated from valid resource pools. For requests with `AllocationMode: All`,
this means that those can not be satisfied if any of the devices available on the node
is in an invalid resource pool. Only if a pod can't be scheduled on any of the nodes in
the cluster _and_ an invalid resource pool were encountered on at least one of the nodes,
will the system return an error. This error will be surfaced as a scheduling error that

> will be added in the `Pod` status.

Author: So they would notice when they try to schedule a pod, but the scheduler is unable to satisfy all claims _and_ it encounters one or more invalid resource pools. So if there are sufficient devices available, it is possible that this might go unnoticed for some time, although arguably it doesn't really have any impact.

In could add a metric from the allocator that expose the number of invalid resource pool encountered, but it has a few challenges:
* The allocator is invoked once per pod-node combination, so we will have to figure out a way to report the metric once per pod I think.
* The allocator tries to do as little work as possible per invocation, so it discards resource pools that aren't relevant to allocating a pod on a node. As a result, it the number of resource pools identified might differ based on the pod and node.

I think the best option is the "Future options" proposal in the KEP: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5515/files#diff-8985915ed27658e0b602c60b13c47d5d7e0309f9dff42df6cc9d514da47d652fR660. Such a controller could update status on ResourceSlice objects and/or expose a metric with the number of invalid resource pools in the cluster.

  // must specify this individually.
  //
  // Exactly one of NodeName, NodeSelector, AllNodes, and PerDeviceNodeSelection
  // must be set when the `Devices` field is set. If the `SharedCounters` field is
  // set, none of the fields can be set.
  //
  // +optional
  // +featureGate=DRAPartitionableDevices
  PerDeviceNodeSelection bool

  // SharedCounters defines a list of counter sets, each of which
  // has a name and a list of counters available.
  //
  // The names of the Counter Sets must be unique in the ResourcePool.
  //

>   // The maximum number of counter sets is 8.

Reviewer: Can I have multiple slices that define additional counter sets? 8 sounds too low pool-wide, otherwise.

// CounterSet defines a named set of counters
// that are available to be used by devices defined in the

> // ResourcePool.

Reviewer 2: Same nit: "resource pool" is a concept, not a Go type.

  // Counters defines the counters that will be consumed by the device.
  //
  // The maximum number of counters in a single DeviceCounterConsumption

>   // is 256. The total number of counters across all DeviceCounterConsumptions

Author: So we had a use-case that informed this limit, but we have found better ways to handle those situations. So we don't really have a clear use-case for this now.

I have updated the design with more sensible limits:
* The maximum number of counters per counter set is 32.
* The maximum number of device counter consumptions per device is 2.
* The maximum number of counters per device counter consumption is 32.

However, even with these limits the worst case is bad enough that we need the ResourceSlice wide limit.

I did look at reducing them further, but even the concrete example with the NVIDIA A100 needs 15 counters per counter set and a device counter consumption that references all of them. Setting the limit to 16 seems to close, and even then, the size worst case is quite high.
I think the core problem here is that since we allow 128 devices in a slice, anything that are "per device" will add up pretty quickly. The ResourceSlice-wide limit gives users the option to specify more details per device, but list fewer devices per ResourceSlice.

In would be useful with input from @johnbelamaric and @klueska on this.

allocation of one device might make other devices unallocatable, and (2) the
ability to define multi-host devices.

### Limits
The size of a resource in Kubernetes is limited by etcd, meaning that we need to make
sure that users can not create `ResourceSlice`s that exceed the limit. To give users
flexibility on how they set up their `ResourceSlices`, we are doing two things:

* `SharedCounters` must be defined in a separate `ResourceSlice`, meaning that the
  counter sets will not contribute towards the resource limit on the `ResourceSlice`s

>   that defines devices. We can use this same pattern in other situations, for example

Reviewer: s/defines/define/

  with Mixins.
* We enforce some limits across the full `ResourceSlice` rather than on
  individual fields.

The per-field limits in a `ResourceSlice` are:
* The maximum number of devices is 128.
* The maximum combined number of capacities and attributes per device is 32.
* The maximum number of device counter consumptions per device is 4.
* The maximum number of counters per device counter consumption is 256.
* The maximum number of taints per device is 4.
* The maximum number of counter sets is 8.
* The maximum number of counters per counter set is 256.

The ResourceSlice-wide limits are:
* The total number of consumed counters across all devices in a ResourceSlice
  must not exceed 2048.

> 

Reviewer: Are there any ResourcePool limits?

### Validation

We will validate as much as possible during admission, but we will not be able
to validate whether references in `DeviceCounterConsumption` points to counter sets
that actually exists. Similarly, we will not be able to identify ambigous references,
where there are multiple counter sets within a single `ResourcePool` with the same name.

> This additional validation will happen during allocation, meaning that issues will

Reviewer: I think we could do this in a controller, as I mentioned.

> not be surfaced until a `ResourceClaim` needs to be allocated.

Author: I've updated the proposal to clarify that we will only consider complete ResourcePools and we will fail and report a fatal error if we find an invalid ResourcePool. Overall I think failing fast is the best option in this case.

> There are ways we may be able to improve the experience:

Author: Yeah, this is a good idea. I've updated the KEP to include it.

* Require that references to counter sets must use the name of the `ResourceSlice` as the
  prefix so references will be on the form `<resourceSliceName>/<counterSetName>`. We can
  validate that the names of `CounterSet`s are unique within a `ResourceSlice`, so this 

>   removes the possibility of ambiguous references.

Author: True. I've rewritten this whole section and removed this option.

* Introduce a controller that can validate that all references within a `ResourcePool`
  are valid. It can then update a status on all `ResourceSlices` in the `ResourcePool`.

>   This will still be asynchronous, so the UX is not as good as validation during admission.

Author: Yeah, I was thinking of this as a possible enhancement in the future. I've clarified that in the KEP. I've also said we will include the client-side validation, which maybe makes it less likely that we will do this.

  with Mixins.
* We enforce some limits across the full `ResourceSlice` rather than on
  individual fields.

The per-field limits in a `ResourceSlice` are:
* The maximum number of devices is 128.
* The maximum combined number of capacities and attributes per device is 32.
* The maximum number of device counter consumptions per device is 4.
* The maximum number of counters per device counter consumption is 256.
* The maximum number of taints per device is 4.
* The maximum number of counter sets is 8.
* The maximum number of counters per counter set is 256.

The ResourceSlice-wide limits are:
* The total number of consumed counters across all devices in a ResourceSlice
  must not exceed 2048.

### Validation

We will validate as much as possible during admission, but we will not be able
to validate whether references in `DeviceCounterConsumption` points to counter sets
that actually exists. Similarly, we will not be able to identify ambigous references,
where there are multiple counter sets within a single `ResourcePool` with the same name.

The allocator will perform additional validation when it tries to use the ResourceSlices for
allocation. It will:

> * Only consider devices from complete `ResourcePools`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Only consider devices from complete resource pools.
```

> * Abort scheduling of the pod and report a fatal error if any of the complete resource pools

Reviewer 2: Prior discussion around this: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5515#discussion_r2340555884 

We discussed the risk of a single broken driver preventing scheduling, but in the end concluded that a) this really shouldn't happen and b) if it happens, the other methods of surfacing the problem wouldn't be obvious enough.

> * Abort scheduling of the pod and report a fatal error if any of the complete resource pools

Reviewer 3: If policy restricts a node-local driver instance to writing with a node name field set and a matching pool name, the ~worst it can do if compromised is break itself. If writing a single invalid pool breaks scheduling to all other pools, that becomes a trivial DOS vector… what is the benefit of treating all pools as broken in the presence of one invalid one?

Was the plan to treat all pools from the same driver as unallocatable, or just from the driver that was invalid? (I don't think either is a great idea, just wondered what the plan was)

> * Abort scheduling of the pod and report a fatal error if any of the complete `ResourcePools`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Abort scheduling of the pod and report a fatal error if any of the complete resource pools
```

  fail validation.

This makes sure any errors are discovered as soon as possible and we avoid situations where

> some devices from a `ResourcePool` might be eligible while others are not. This could lead to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
some devices from a resource pool might be eligible while others are not. This could lead to
```

situations that would be very difficult to root cause.
The drawback of this solution is that any error in the `ResourceSlices` for a node will
prevent all devices from that node from being allocated. Also, a `ResourceSlice` with
the node selector `AllNodes: true` will prevent devices from all nodes from being allocated.

To try to prevent this situations from happening, we will add client-side validation in the
ResourceSlice controller helper, so that any errors in the ResourceSlices will be caught before
they even are applied to the APIServer. This will only work for controllers that use the helper
code, but it will minimize the chances that the Allocator will find errors during the allocation phase.

#### Future options

> We can further improve the experience here by introducing a controller that can validate that all references within a `ResourcePool`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can further improve the experience here by introducing a controller that can validate that all references within a resource pool
```

I'll stop calling this out now... please do a search/replace :sweat_smile:
